GWEN IFILL: Good evening.
I'm Gwen Ifill.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And I'm Hari
Sreenivasan.
Judy Woodruff is away.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"on
tonight:
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
Prosperity and happiness in both
our countries
will increase if we work
together.
GWEN IFILL: Donald Trump visits
Mexico for
a surprise meeting with the
country's president
ahead of his much-anticipated
immigration
speech.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Also ahead
this Wednesday:
in the shadow of the fence --
how the people
living next to Mexico's border
feel about
the nation's security.
GWEN IFILL: And training
entrepreneurs -- how
one program helps young
inventors turn their
big ideas into the next big
thing.
CHRISTINA TAMER, VentureWell:
They're young,
so they have a tougher time
being taken seriously.
So, having our support in terms
of, you know,
having someone to bounce ideas
off of, check
their assumptions, look through
their materials,
and be a coach and a mentor.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All that and
more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
GWEN IFILL: The presidential
race took another
sharp turn today.
Republican Donald Trump flew to
Mexico to
meet with that country's
president, hours
before giving a major speech on
immigration.
Trump's tough talk about Mexico
has made him
widely disliked there, but both
men said their
talks were constructive.
We will have a full report right
after the
news summary.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In the day's
other news:
Two Republican senators geared
up for tough
general election fights after
sailing past
primary opponents.
In Arizona, five-term Senator
John McCain
handily defeated a Tea Party
challenger, and
rallied supporters at a victory
rally last
night.
SEN.
JOHN MCCAIN (R), Arizona: It's
imperative
Republicans maintain our
majorities in Congress.
It's important to American's
future that we
have a say over the next
president's appointments
to this United States Supreme
Court.
Now, let's go win one more time.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
HARI SREENIVASAN: Meanwhile,
Florida Senator
Marco Rubio won his own primary,
as he seeks
a second term.
Also in Florida, Democratic
Congresswoman
Debbie Wasserman Schultz
defeated an opponent
who had been endorsed by Bernie
Sanders.
GWEN IFILL: A U.S. commercial
flight landed
in Cuba today for the first time
in more than
half-a-century.
It is part of overall efforts to
improve ties.
The JetBlue flight from Fort
Lauderdale, Florida,
arrived in Santa Clara, Cuba,
with 150 passengers
on board.
They included Transportation
Secretary Anthony
Foxx.
Flights to Havana and other
cities are also
in the works.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In Brazil,
President Dilma
Rousseff was formally ousted by
the country's
Senate for violating budgetary
rules.
She denied any wrongdoing, but
the vote against
her was 61 to 20.
It followed a year-long
impeachment battle.
DILMA ROUSSEFF, Brazilian
President (through
translator): The Senate has just
impeached
the first elected woman
president of Brazil.
There was no constitutional
reason to do it.
This is just the beginning of a
coup that
will indiscriminately beat back
any progressive
political organization,
progressive and democratic.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Rousseff plans
to appeal
to Brazil's highest court.
The drama has played out amid a
separate corruption
scandal that has landed dozens
of business
and political figures in jail.
GWEN IFILL: Protests against
Indian rule flared
across Kashmir today, as
authorities lifted
a 54-day curfew.
Tensions have spiked in the
disputed region
since a rebel commander was
killed in early
July.
Today's crowds battled security
forces with
rocks and wood, and the troops
fired back
with rubber bullets.
One person was killed, and about
150 were
injured.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Towns across
Northern Japan
are underwater from a typhoon
strike tonight.
At least 11 people died, most of
them residents
at a nursing home.
Aerials today showed the damaged
building
on the banks of a swollen river.
Elsewhere, rescue workers pulled
stranded
victims from rooftops.
Meanwhile, Hawaii's Big Island
is bracing
for a hurricane overnight.
And a tropical storm is brewing
in the Gulf
of Mexico.
GWEN IFILL: On Wall Street
today, stocks fell
again, as oil prices sank.
The Dow Jones industrial average
lost 53 points
to close near 18400.
The Nasdaq fell nine points, and
the S&P 500
slipped five.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And the town
of Bunol in
Eastern Spain was seeing red
today.
It was the annual Tomatina
fiesta, marking
a 1945 food fight among local
children.
Revelers pelted each other with
160 tons of
tomatoes and left the town
covered in red
pulp.
Some 20,000 locals and tourists
took part.
MAN (through translator): This
was crazy.
The tomatoes hit you very hard,
but it's an
experience that has to be lived.
This doesn't happen in any other
place.
Many tomatoes hit my face, but
I'm happy I
have experienced it.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Organizers
hosed the streets
down minutes after the event
ended.
The throngs of tomato-stained
warriors were
supplied with public showers.
GWEN IFILL: I had to talk Hari
out of going.
(LAUGHTER)
GWEN IFILL: Still to come on the
"NewsHour":
analyzing Donald Trump's meeting
with Mexico
President Enrique Pena Nieto; a
glimpse into
life on the U.S.-Mexico border;
the controversy
surrounding actor Nate Parker
ahead of his
new film "Birth of a Nation";
and much more.
HARI SREENIVASAN: We begin with
Donald Trump's
day trip to Mexico City.
It dominated the political
headlines and drew
even more attention to a
high-profile speech
he gives tonight on immigration.
It was the unlikeliest of
summits, Donald
Trump, who launched his campaign
by speaking
of Mexican immigrants as rapists
and criminals
and made other inflammatory
remarks.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
It is a great honor to be
invited by you,
Mr. President, a great, great
honor.
Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And President
Enrique Pena
Nieto, who's compared him to
Adolf Hitler.
ENRIQUE PENA NIETO, Mexican
President (through
translator): I have also voiced
the grievances
that we have felt in Mexico
because of the
statements that have been
issued.
But I'm sure that his interest
is genuine
in wanting to build a
relationship and lead
our societies to stability.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Trump agreed
today on building
a relationship, but he has also
repeatedly
called for building a wall along
the border.
DONALD TRUMP: We did discuss the
wall.
We didn't discuss payment of the
That will be for a later date.
This was a very preliminary
meeting.
I think it was an excellent
HARI SREENIVASAN: Lately, he's
seemed to suggest
his stance on immigration could
soften.
And his visit today came hours
before he delivers
a major speech on the subject
this evening
in Phoenix.
DONALD TRUMP: This is a
humanitarian disaster,
the dangerous treks, the abuse
by gangs and
cartels and the extreme physical
dangers,
and it must be solved.
It must be solved quickly.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Trump's visit
to Mexico
City sparked protests there
today.
It also turned up the political
heat on Pena
Nieto, who's already widely
unpopular in Mexico.
A political rival, former
President Vicente
Fox, condemned the invitation to
Trump and
even apologized.
VICENTE FOX, Former Mexican
President: He
is not welcome to Mexico.
By 130 million people, we don't
like him,
we don't want him, we reject his
visit.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Pena Nieto has
invited Democratic
nominee Hillary Clinton as well.
Her campaign says she will meet
with him at
the appropriate time.
Today, she addressed the
American Legion Convention
in Cincinnati, and dismissed
Trump's Mexican
trip as too little, too late.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
You don't build a coalition by
insulting our
friends or acting like a loose
cannon.
And it certainly takes more than
trying to
make up for a year of insults
and insinuations
by dropping in on our neighbors
for a few
hours and then flying home
again.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Clinton also
called for
strong American leadership in
the world, and
accused Trump of advocating
retreat.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON:
Threatening to walk
away from our alliances,
ignoring the importance
that they still are to us, is
not only wrong;
it's dangerous.
If I'm your president, our
friends will always
know America will have your
backs, and we
expect you to have ours.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Trump is
scheduled to address
the same American Legion
Convention tomorrow.
GWEN IFILL: For more on the
Mexico City meeting
between that nation's president
and GOP nominee
Donald Trump, how it came to be,
and how it
was received, we turn now to
Ambassador Roger
Noriega, former assistant
secretary of state
in the George W. Bush
administration, and
Dan Nowicki, national political
reporter for
The Arizona Republic.
Dan Nowicki, since Donald Trump
is going to
be in your town tonight giving
this big immigration
speech, maybe you can answer
what Donald Trump
was hoping to accomplish with
the surprise
trip to Mexico, as well as with
the speech
tonight.
DAN NOWICKI, The Arizona
Republic: Right.
Well I think it gave him an
opportunity to
look presidential and kind of
look more serious
on immigration.
He's been criticized a lot, and
a lot of the
criticism has focused on his
proposals as
just not very serious or
realistic.
And first and foremost is his
significant
signature issue of building the
wall and having
Mexico pay for it.
And it was a little interesting.
He went down to Mexico and
didn't raise the
issue of Mexico paying for the
wall.
So I think it's a little
interesting to see
if kind of the soft-spoken tone
that Trump
took in Mexico City will carry
over across
the border when he comes here in
Phoenix.
I have covered several Trump
rallies here
in Arizona and one in Las Vegas,
and, you
know, one of the biggest
applause lines is
building the wall, where he
leads the audience
in asking them who's going to
pay for the
wall.
They yell Mexico.
So, I wonder if he's going to
use that line
tonight in Phoenix.
GWEN IFILL: Hmm.
Well, we will be listening to
see.
Ambassador Noriega, if Donald
Trump was trying
to look presidential with this
trip, what
was President Pena trying to do?
ROGER NORIEGA, American
Enterprise Institute:
I think Pena Nieto was taking a
big risk taking
on this meeting.
He's extraordinarily unpopular
already in
Mexico.
And in the last 24 hours...
GWEN IFILL: His popularity
somewhere in the
20s.
ROGER NORIEGA: In the 20s,
mid-20s perhaps,
probably going down.
In the last 24 hours, Mexican
pundits were
saying, you know, he'd better
confront Trump
on some of the uglier things
that he has said,
he better defend the dignity of
the Mexican
people and Mexican immigrants.
He should make it very clear
that Mexico will
have nothing to do with paying
for whatever
kind of wall Trump wants to
build.
And none of that happened.
GWEN IFILL: Well, he did talk
about respecting
Mexican people.
He did talk about that.
ROGER NORIEGA: Right, but
nothing in the form
of an apology or some kind of
acknowledgment
from Trump.
So I think, quite frankly, if
you're a Trump
supporter today, you would have
to say that
he achieved his objective by
swooping into
town with this kind of drive-by
diplomacy,
but Pena Nieto had a very bad
day.
GWEN IFILL: Do we think that
Pena Nieto maybe
had a change of heart?
And this is the man who likens
Donald Trump
to Mussolini and Hitler.
ROGER NORIEGA: Well, there is no
telling what
-- how the discussions went.
But I'm sure that pundits, the
Mexican people
would have expected a much more
forceful public
statement from their president
while Trump
was there as a guest of the
president in Mexico
City.
GWEN IFILL: Dan Nowicki, we know
that Donald
Trump isn't very popular among
Hispanics in
general, Mexican-Americans
perhaps in particular,
and I wonder whether this kind
of appearance,
this kind of joint appearance,
might open
up lines of communication, or is
everything
set in stone at this point
politically?
DAN NOWICKI: Yes, I don't really
think his
audience is, you know, the
Latinos in the
United States.
I think he's kind of aiming more
at some of
the moderate Republican white
people who he's
lost, especially here in
Arizona.
He's hemorrhaged a lot of a
moderate Republicans
who normally would be backing
the presidential
nominee of their party, but this
year are
making a pretty close race with
Hillary Clinton
in what is usually,
traditionally, a red state,
Arizona.
GWEN IFILL: We talked a bit
about the building
the wall idea, the border
discussion, but
there were other issues which
apparently were
raised during this conversation.
One of them that they don't
agree about, Roger
Noriega, is NAFTA.
Donald Trump says he thinks it's
a disaster
and has stolen American jobs.
And that's not what we heard
from President
Pena Nieto.
ROGER NORIEGA: Well, the very
superficial
joint press conference really
didn't touch
on any detail on the terms of
NAFTA and the
mutual beneficial relationships.
And that's because Trump, quite
frankly, I
think, is incapable of carrying
on a serious
conversation about the details
of the benefits
that accrue to the United States
in terms
of our national security, our
economic security,
the number of jobs created by
NAFTA, six million
jobs in the United States
created by trade
with Mexico alone.
And I think that there was a
failure on Pena
Nieto to make that in a strong
way.
As a matter of fact, his
suggestion that there
are parts of NAFTA that could be
renegotiated
I think was kind of a
capitulation because,
there was a failure to address
the genuine
benefits that we accrue from
NAFTA and, frankly,
challenge Trump's failure to
command the details
and understand those details.
GWEN IFILL: Dan Nowicki, let's
talk politics
for a minute, because you had a
big primary
in your state yesterday.
John McCain, who has endorsed
Donald Trump,
but not enthusiastically, did
very well.
Jeff Flake, the other senator,
has been very
anti-Trump.
But in a moment like this today
and in a turn
like that he pulled off today,
did he manage
to trump Hillary Clinton on a
day when there
was very little attention paid
to her big
speech?
DAN NOWICKI: Well, I think he
did.
I think he certainly stole the
spotlight.
And I think if you're in Hillary
Clinton's
campaign, you have got to be
scratching your
head a little bit and wondering
if you missed
an opportunity here as well.
You know, whether or not he's
going to win
over something like Jeff Flake,
who has been
very critical of him, remains to
be seen.
But I think Flake has kind of
been encouraging
him to go in this direction and
kind of reach
out to Latinos in the United
States and also
kind of cut back on the
anti-Mexico rhetoric.
So it might help a little bit on
that end.
GWEN IFILL: And what are the
expectations,
Dan, tonight for tonight's
speech in Phoenix?
DAN NOWICKI: Well, I think
everyone really
wants to know what Trump is
going to say about
the estimated 11 million
undocumented immigrants
who have settled in the United
States.
So, that's kind of a big
question.
And I don't think any of the
immigration reformers
are really expecting him to
change much.
I think they see this as a lot
of more of
the same.
I think if you hear him saying
something like,
oh, we're going to enforce the
laws, we're
going to secure the border, I
think you're
just going to see him basically
sticking with
what he's been saying all along,
maybe wording
it a little bit more moderately.
But no one really expects him to
go too far
in terms of embracing any kind
of, you know,
comprehensive immigration reform
or anything
like that.
GWEN IFILL: And, finally,
Ambassador Noriega,
was today in the end a
discipline test for
both the Mexican president and
the Republican
presidential nominee?
ROGER NORIEGA: Right.
I think certainly Trump passed
that test in
being able to sort of carry on
this moderate
discourse and not offend anybody
in particular.
On the other hand, I think, for
Pena Nieto,
a bad day.
He's already very unpopular.
I think that the political
implications in
Mexico will be bad for his
party.
GWEN IFILL: OK.
Ambassador Roger Noriega and Dan
Nowicki of
The Arizona Republic, thank you
both very
much.
DAN NOWICKI: Thanks.
GWEN IFILL: Online, we take
another look at
the stakes behind Donald Trump's
immigration
speech in Arizona tonight.
You can watch a stream of that
speech on our
home page, PBS.org/NewsHour.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Perhaps the
most repeated
theme in Republican nominee
Donald Trump's
campaign is building a bigger,
better, border
wall.
Currently, a fence runs along
652 miles of
the almost 2,000-mile border.
And many residents on both sides
doubt a new
wall is a solution to the
problems they face.
Special correspondent Angela
Kocherga with
Arizona PBS' Cronkite News
reports from Nogales.
ANGELA KOCHERGA: Every evening,
Melissa Biskofsky
and her dog take a walk.
MELISSA BISKOFSKY, Arizona: I
love my walks,
and my dog loves them too.
ANGELA KOCHERGA: Her favorite
route runs along
the border fence in Arizona.
MELISSA BISKOFSKY: The fence --
well, yes,
there is a fence, but I say to
hello to everybody
on the other side of the fence.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
We're going to have a strong
border.
We're going to have the wall.
ANGELA KOCHERGA: With all the
talk of building
a big wall, some Americans may
not realize
illegal immigration from Mexico
is at a historic
low.
And there has never been
security on the Southwest
border, including hidden ground
sensors, cameras.
This one offers a view from a
blimp high above
West Texas.
And the Border Patrol has never
had more agents,
21,000 in all.
About 650 miles of fence exist
in strategic
spots along the nearly
2,000-mile Southwest
border, from California, where
the structure
extends into the Pacific Ocean,
to Texas,
where it runs parallel to the
Rio Grande.
Fernando Flores Barrera can see
the fence
in Tijuana from his front yard.
The construction worker has
crossed back and
forth for decades to work on
U.S. job sites.
He says Donald Trump should
think twice about
building a border wall.
FERNANDO FLORES BARRERA,
Immigrant (through
translator): He should let
immigrants work,
instead of blocking their path.
Just as we help them, the
Americans, by working,
they should give us a hand.
You need us too.
ANGELA KOCHERGA: On the U.S.
side of the border,
Callai Hernandez also questions
the need for
Trump's $25 billion wall, since
there's a
big fence in place now.
CALLAI HERNANDEZ, Arizona: I
don't think there's
a need for it.
We don't feel unsafe or
anything.
ANGELA KOCHERGA: Her son's
soccer team practices
in Eagle Pass right near the
international
border, the banks of the Rio
Grande.
One of longest sections of
border fence cuts
through the Desert Southwest.
The fence is found in the middle
of bustling
border cities like Nogales,
where, here, it's
part of the landscape, a
fixture, a fact of
life.
Biskofsky has a view of the
rust-colored fence
from her home perched on a hill
in Nogales,
Arizona.
MELISSA BISKOFSKY: When they
have parties
on the other side, you can hear
the music
on Saturdays or Fridays.
They're pretty loud.
ANGELA KOCHERGA: She's so close
to the border,
people trying to sneak into the
U.S. sometimes
cut through her backyard.
During our interview, Yemmi (ph)
and other
neighborhood dogs noticed this
man.
Before long, Border Patrol
agents spotted
him too.
Many border residents doubt a
new wall will
keep people from trying to
cross, or deter
drug traffickers at all.
Biskofsky doesn't have to look
far for proof.
Two years ago, authorities
discovered a 481-foot
drug smuggling tunnel in the
basement of the
home she now rents.
MELISSA BISKOFSKY: Well, this is
where they
would get the drugs.
ANGELA KOCHERGA: The entrance is
now sealed.
The previous tenant chose the
property because
of its proximity to the border.
MELISSA BISKOFSKY: Well, when he
first arrived,
the neighbors told me that he
was dressed
in white and he was carrying a
Bible.
He had a dog called El Chapo.
And, yes, the neighbors, after
everything
transpired, yes, that's when
they found it
suspicious that his dog was
called El Chapo.
ANGELA KOCHERGA: As in convicted
drug trafficker
Chapo Guzman, who authorities
say has used
tunnels, including the one in
this house,
to move tons of drugs into the
U.S., in spite
of a border fence.
These days, Biskofsky is
patching up holes
in her own fence.
MELISSA BISKOFSKY: If you go
along the fence,
every so often, you see a hole,
because she's
been digging all along the fence
to see where
she can get out.
ANGELA KOCHERGA: More proof
fences everywhere
are not 100 percent effective.
MELISSA BISKOFSKY: Building a
wall, and being
against building the wall, I
think it's still
not addressing the real problem.
ANGELA KOCHERGA: So far, there
has no political
will to deal with the root
causes of immigration
and the growing demand for
drugs.
Instead, during this hotly
contested presidential
race, much of the talk has been
about building
a bigger border wall, a
questionable solution,
according to many of those who
live in the
shadow of the border fence.
MELISSA BISKOFSKY: Because it
cannot separate
these communities.
ANGELA KOCHERGA: For the "PBS
NewsHour," I'm
Angela Kocherga in Nogales,
Arizona.
GWEN IFILL: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
college students
become inventors, solving
crucial world problems;
and an author's take on what he
calls the
end of white Christian America.
But, first: The filmmaker behind
one of the
more widely anticipated and
potentially controversial
movies of the year is now at the
center of
his own controversy touching on
sexual assault,
consent, and race.
In a year when Hollywood's
troubles with diversity
have been well-chronicled, actor
and director
Nate Parker film "Birth of a
Nation" promised
to be a breakthrough.
But Parker's own tangled past
has changed
the conversation.
Jeffrey Brown has
the story.
JEFFREY BROWN: "The Birth of a
Nation" tells
the story of Nat Turner, who led
a bloody
slave rebellion in Virginia in
1831.
NATE PARKER, Actor/Director,
"The Birth of
a Nation": The lord has spoken
to me, visions
of what's to come, a rise of
good against
evil.
ACTOR: What are we going to do?
NATE PARKER: We will fight.
Once it begins, our brothers and
sisters will
join.
And we will number in the
hundreds, thousands
even.
JEFFREY BROWN:
Thirty-six-year-old Nate Parker
wrote, directed and starred in
the movie,
which first wowed audiences last
January at
the Sundance Film Festival.
Parker spoke of his motivation.
NATE PARKER: When people asked
me who I wanted
to be like, I would say Nat
Turner.
So, about two years ago, I
stepped away from
acting and said, the next film
I'm involved
with will be "The Birth of a
Nation."
JEFFREY BROWN: The film won the
audience award
and the grand jury prize at
Sundance.
Fox Searchlight bought its
rights for a festival
record $17.5 million, and its
national release
is due in October.
But, earlier this month,
headlines emerged
about a 1999 rape allegation
made against
Parker when he was a student at
Penn State.
The alleged victim claimed she'd
been unconscious.
Parker was charged and later
acquitted.
Parker's friend and "Birth of a
Nation" co-writer
Jean Celestin was also accused
in the case.
He was convicted, but the
verdict was overturned
on appeal.
In a recent interview with
"Variety" magazine,
Parker reiterated his claim that
the sex was
consensual.
"Seventeen years ago," he said,
"I experienced
a very painful moment in my
life.
It resulted in it being
litigated.
I was cleared of it.
That's that.
Seventeen years later, I'm a
filmmaker."
The remarks struck a nerve,
especially after
the revelation days later that
the alleged
victim had killed herself in
2012.
Last week, in his first
interview since learning
about the suicide, Parker
changed his tone,
telling "Ebony" magazine: "I was
acting as
if I was the victim, and that's
wrong.
My only thought was, I'm
innocent and everyone
needs to I know.
I didn't even think for a second
about her."
Also last week, the American
Film Institute
canceled a screening of the
movie.
And we explore some of the
issues surrounding
this with Roxane Gay,
writer/author of the
essay collection "Bad Feminist,"
and associate
professor at Purdue University,
and Mike Sargent,
chief film critic for Pacifica
Radio and co-president
of the Black Film Critics
Circle.
Welcome to both of you.
Let me start with you, Roxane
Gay.
You wrote recently: "I am
struggling to have
empathy for Nate Parker, a man
experiencing
the height of his career, while
being forced
to reckon with his past."
So, explain that.
Was there a conflict of emotions
when you
first learned of this?
ROXANE GAY, Purdue University:
Absolutely.
You know, when you follow
someone's career
trajectory, and you see them at
the height
of their career with a
critically acclaimed
film that sold for a record
amount of money
at Sundance, of course I want
him to do very
well, I want the movie to
succeed.
But I cannot overlook these
allegations against
him.
He was acquitted, yes, but his
handling of
the incident troubles me.
The fact that the incident
occurred at all
troubles me.
That he's still friends with the
man with
whom he was accused troubles me.
And so I want to have empathy
for him, but
I have far more empathy for the
victim and
for the truth.
JEFFREY BROWN: Mike Sargent, I
assume you
were first aware of the film as
a filmmaker
yourself and film critic.
What were your thoughts when you
learned about
this?
MIKE SARGENT, Film Critic,
Pacifica Radio:
Well, I was conflicted on many
levels, because,
as a filmmaker, you know, it's
great to see
a black filmmaker get to make
something.
Black historical dramas are not
easy to, A,
get made, and they don't
generally do too
well.
As a film critic, of course, I
want to support
black filmmakers.
But I'm also a father of a
daughter who's
in college.
So this strikes a particular
chord with me.
And similar to Roxane, his
handling of it
and his attitude about it, I
mean, he is,
after all, a storyteller.
And very often, we tell
ourselves stories
that we begin to believe.
So, I am conflicted.
I can't say I won't see the
film.
I definitely will.
But, no, I don't think that he's
doing what
he could and probably should in
terms of atoning
for what has happened.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, so, Roxane
Gay, what
should he be doing?
And what should we as audience
members do?
You and others have said this
raises an old
question, right, about what --
can you love
the art, even while you hate or
disdain, or
whatever, the artist?
ROXANE GAY: Absolutely.
It's really challenging.
And I myself, as I wrote in my
editorial for
The Times, cannot separate the
art and the
artist, or I choose not to.
But I do think we have to have a
conversation
about restorative justice,
because, as a culture,
we do not know how to achieve
justice for
victims of sexual violence.
And I don't think that someone's
life should
end because they commit a crime,
but I do
want to see atonement.
I do want to see him having more
self-examination
about the role that he played
that night,
because there was a third man
there, and he
recognized that it was a bad
situation and
that this young woman was
probably in no position
to consent, and he walked away.
JEFFREY BROWN: But he -- but can
I say -- but
can I just interrupt you for a
second?
ROXANE GAY: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: Because a bad
situation, but,
at least legally, no crime
committed, because
it's worth saying again found
not guilty.
ROXANE GAY: Well, legally, lots
of things
are allowed that shouldn't be
allowed.
It was more than a mistake.
I consider it to have been a
crime.
I think that, when a woman is
passed out drunk,
she cannot consent, and that sex
shouldn't
be on the table in any way,
shape or form.
I call it rape.
You know, we don't know what
happened that
night, but I do think that I
would like to
see just more acknowledgment.
And the interview that Parker
did with "Ebony"
is a step in the right
direction, but it was
also the kind of interview where
you can tell
that he was really well-coached
by a publicist,
and he was saying most of the
right things,
while also just acknowledging
that he has
never really thought about
gender, and that
he didn't really think about the
victim ever.
And that troubles me.
JEFFREY BROWN: Mike Sargent,
what about this
question of the art vs. the
artist, and especially
in a case like this, as you both
have said,
that the role of race in both
the film and
the filmmaker?
MIKE SARGENT: Well, I think the
role of race
is undeniable.
I mean, you know, there are
definitely filmmakers
who have done very, very more
than questionable
things, whether it's a Roman
Polanski or a
Woody Allen, and they have gone
to not only
have long careers, but win
Oscars.
But the question does become,
can you separate
the artist from the art, and
should you?
And at what point have you
atoned?
At what point -- what could and
should he
be doing?
That is a good question.
I mean, I have my own ideas of
what I think
he should do and how I think he
should address
it.
But, again, like Roxane said,
he's being coached.
He's being held -- there is a
way he needs
to present himself, so that they
can still
do well with this film.
JEFFREY BROWN: Mike Sargent, it
was announced
today that there is going to be
a press conference
that he's speaking at, at the
Toronto Film
Festival in a few weeks.
What would you like him to say?
MIKE SARGENT: Well, for me, I
would him to
-- as Roxane mentioned, I would
like some
more self-examination.
I mean, let's look at this for a
little bit.
I mean, even if he himself feels
that he didn't
commit this act, and if he felt
it was consensual,
you know, she went under, after
that, what
would be termed bullying after
that.
She became a victim.
Now, that is something that, as
a man and
as a father -- and he's got
daughters -- you
know, this is something he needs
to address,
all of it.
How do we handle these things?
How should young men treat
themselves?
There are a lot of things that
he could be
doing and a lot of things he
could be addressing
in regards to this whole matter,
because this
matter is something that it's
not just about
race.
It's specifically about gender,
but it's also
about, you know, once you have,
let's say,
been acquitted of this, that
doesn't mean
you can turn your back on it.
There was still something he was
involved
in that ended up contributing to
a woman's
death.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, so, let me
just ask,
finally, Roxane Gay, will you
see the film?
Do you think others should see
the fill?
ROXANE GAY: I am not going to
see the film,
no.
But I do think that people
should do what
they want to do.
The reality is that he's not the
only person
that worked on this movie.
There is an entire cast and crew
that put
a lot of work and a lot of
really thoughtful
work into the making of this
movie.
And so I am in no way suggesting
that other
people shouldn't.
I just cannot personally do it,
for many reasons,
both personal and just ethical.
JEFFREY BROWN: And, Mike
Sargent, briefly,
will you see the film?
MIKE SARGENT: Well, as a film
critic, I really
have to see the film.
I have to be able to see the
film.
I have to be able to judge it on
its own merits
as a film.
But I can't ignore what happened
behind it,
and I can't ignore the history
behind the
filmmaker.
JEFFREY BROWN: Mike Sargent and
Roxane Gay,
thank you both very much.
ROXANE GAY: Thank you.
MIKE SARGENT: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: As students head
back to college
this year, some will be doing
more than just
the usual course work.
Special correspondent Cat Wise
has a story
about a group of student
inventors trying
to make their mark, part of our
weekly series
covering the Leading Edge of
science and technology.
CAT WISE: Music, wine, and ideas
were flowing
at an event in Portland, Oregon,
that brought
together college students from
around the
country who have all been hard
at work, between
classes and tests, inventing the
next big
thing.
While the atmosphere was
festive, there was
some serious business going on.
Fourteen teams pitched their
inventions to
invited guests, who were playing
the role
of venture investors for the
evening, with
venture bucks to invest in the
ballot boxes
of their favorite start-ups.
MAN: Back the team that you
think is going
to change the world.
CAT WISE: There were plenty of
cool ideas
to choose from, like a low-cost
water contamination
detection system from an
all-women team of
engineers at Santa Clara
University, and a
device to help babies with
respiratory distress
syndrome in low-resource
hospitals developed
by students at Western Michigan
University.
And there was even a group from
a local high
school trying to tackle another
common problem
in many parts of the world, lack
of electricity
to charge cell phones.
WILLIAM WU, West Salem High
School: We made
a thermoelectric generator that
can be used
in open fire to generate
electricity while
cooking.
The metal rod right here will go
directly
into the pot they're using for
cooking, and
the heat will go from the rod
into the thermal
electric generators that will
generate electricity
from the heat.
CAT WISE: Many of the products
on display
are still in the early stages of
development,
and some build on ideas that are
already out
in the marketplace.
But a few of the teams have
created things
never invented before.
Katherine Jin is part of the
Kinnos team from
Columbia University.
She and her two co-founders, who
are also
her classmates, were inspired
when they saw
a need for better disinfection
methods during
the Ebola crisis in Africa.
KEVIN TYAN, Columbia University:
One of the
current problems with the way
people decontaminate
today is that the disinfectants
are clear
and transparent, so you can't
see where you're
spraying.
They bounce off waterproof
surfaces, just
like rain off an umbrella.
CAT WISE: After some late nights
and a lot
of trial and error, they
developed Highlight,
a powder that adds temporary
color to bleach
and enhances adhesion to
surfaces.
Jason Kang, a biomedical
engineering major,
gave me a demo.
JASON KANG, Columbia University:
What we're
going to do is, we're going to
add highlight
directly to the bleach.
So, I have poured it in here.
So, once you add the powder,
it's really simple.
You just mix it, and it just
dissolves instantly.
CAT WISE: OK, so what's this
surface here
that you are going to spray?
JASON KANG: Yes, so this is
actually a square
cut from one of the suits that
doctors will
wear when they are treating
patients in the
field.
So, I'm going to spray it on
here.
So, you can see that it fully
covers the surface.
It's really easy to see where
you sprayed.
It has a nice sticky coverage.
It will trap the viruses and
bacteria and
kill them.
CAT WISE: The event was
sponsored by a nonprofit
called VentureWell that provides
financial
backing and training for
student-run start-ups.
The organization is funded by
the Lemelson
Foundation, which also helps
fund the "NewsHour."
Over the course of two days
leading up to
the competition, students and
supportive faculty
attended a variety of
skill-building workshops.
WOMAN: The theme of today is
really around
communication and managing how
you are perceived.
So, our theme here is how to
help your ideas
shine.
Every single person is going to
have a one-minute
pitch and a five-word pitch.
CAT WISE: Teams mixed up and
shared their
ideas with their peers.
Luke Neese is a former police
officer, and
a recent Texas A&M grad, who has
developed
a system to detect gunshots
using sound waves.
LUKE NEESE, Inventor: I started
off looking
at what was available in the
gunshot detection
market, and everything was
ridiculously expensive.
KEETH SMART, PHYSICLO: What
PHYSICLO does
is, we integrate resistance
bands and panels
into compression tights.
CAT WISE: Keeth Smart developed
his sportswear
product while at Columbia
Business School.
He also happens to be a former
professional
fencer who won silver at the
Beijing Olympics.
Smart launched his company last
year with
the help of $150,000 in
crowd-funding.
But, he says, it's still hard to
get the word
out.
KEETH SMART: We know that, like,
once we show
this product to people, they
will love it,
but getting it out there is a
big challenge
for most entrepreneurs.
CAT WISE: Christina Tamer knows
well the challenges
that student entrepreneurs face.
She's a program officer with
VentureWell.
CHRISTINA TAMER, VentureWell:
First of all,
they're young, so they have a
tougher time
being taken seriously.
So, having our support in terms
of, you know,
having someone to bounce ideas
off of, to
check their assumptions, look
through their
materials, and be a coach and a
mentor.
CAT WISE: For their part, the
Kinnos team
is moving full steam ahead with
Highlight,
which they have been
field-testing in West
Africa.
We caught up with them in New
York as they
were making a new batch in a
Columbia University
engineering lab.
They also had upcoming exams to
think about.
KATHERINE JIN, Columbia
University: I think
all of us have, at this point,
sacrificed
a test grade or even a class at
the end of
the day to complete something we
need to get
done for the company.
CAT WISE: All of their hard work
is starting
to pay off.
They have got their first
customer, not overseas,
as you might expect, but here in
the U.S.,
the New York City Fire
Department, which had
its own Ebola scare.
DR.
DAVID PREZANT, FDNY; As New York
City, we
are one of the entry points for
world travelers,
especially world travelers from
West Africa.
So, clearly, this was on our
agenda to prepare,
to be able to respond
effectively and safely.
CAT WISE: Doctor David Prezant
is the chief
medical officer for the FDNY.
He says Highlight has filled a
big need for
the department.
DR.
DAVID PREZANT: Now you have an
EMS worker
in full protective equipment,
knowing that
protective equipment is really
good, but now,
when he is sprayed or she is
sprayed with
the bleach, they're able to look
at their
equipment, their hand, their
glove, and they
see it's blue.
CAT WISE: Back in Portland, as
the evening
competition wrapped up, the
teams who received
the most venture bucks were
announced.
MAN: OK, this is what we have
been waiting
for.
The first prize, with $96
million venture
bucks, they will be getting
$1,000, and it
goes to -- it goes to Kinnos.
(APPLAUSE)
CAT WISE: The team enjoyed their
win and then
quickly got back to work.
A few days later, they were
headed to Europe
to meet with the World Health
Organization
and Doctors Without Borders.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Cat
Wise in Portland
Oregon.
GWEN IFILL: The Kinnos team
recently graduated
from Columbia University, and
the three are
now working full-time on their
product.
The story is part of our regular
Breakthrough
coverage of invention and
innovation.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now to the
latest addition
to the "NewsHour" Bookshelf.
Religion has played a
significant role in
American culture and politics
for more than
200 years.
But the country's demographics
are rapidly
changing.
That is the thesis put forward
by Robert Jones
in his new book, "The End of
White Christian
America."
Judy Woodruff sat down with him
recently.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Robert Jones,
welcome to the
program.
So, provocative title, "The End
of White Christian
America."
But you say in the book what
you're really
asking is why white Protestant
America has
experienced such a dramatic
decline.
Why did you want to tackle that
question?
ROBERT JONES, Author, "The End
of White Christian
America": Well, thanks for
having me.
You know, when I was looking at
the data,
I realized that we had really
crossed this
very significant threshold in
American culture.
And that is that we had moved,
just in the
last eight years, from being a
majority white
Christian country, 54 percent in
2008, when
Barack Obama was running for
president the
first time, to being a minority
white Christian
country.
Today, we are 45 percent white
and Christian.
Now, when I use the term white
Christian America,
I am really referring to this
cultural and
institutional world built
primarily by Protestants.
So, if you think about the
cultural center
of the U.S. being a kind of
Waspy, white,
Anglo-Saxon, Protestant culture,
that's the
culture that I'm talking about
and that has
really faded from the center of
American culture.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you talk --
excuse me -- and
you talk about how influential,
how powerful
it's been in the history of this
country.
ROBERT JONES: Yes, absolutely.
I mean, one of the books when I
was doing
the historical research put it
this way, from
an historian, said, if you were
in charge
of something big and important
in the middle
of the 20th century, chances
are, you were
white, you were Protestant, and
you were male.
And that really held sway all
the way up through
the latter part of the 20th
century.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And then what
started happening
in the -- you say roughly in the
'60s, 1970s
and beyond?
ROBERT JONES: Yes, we started
seeing some
of the shift with the kind of
cultural revolution
in the 1960s, but we really see
it seize demographically
in the 1990s.
And so just a couple of
examples.
In the 1990s, for example, nine
in 10 Americans
claimed a religious affiliation.
So, less than one in 10 said
they claimed
no religious affiliation at all.
Today, that number is 23
percent, and among
young people, it's 34 percent.
So, we have seen this kind of
move away from
particularly white Christian
churches really
since the 1990s to the present.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, that's the --
and that's
a change from previous
generations, that may
have moved away from churches
for a time during
their 20s, but came back to
establishment
religion.
And you're saying that didn't
happen -- hasn't
happened.
ROBERT JONES: That's right.
That's a really critical thing,
that every
generation has been less
affiliated in their
20s.
What's different about this
generation is
that it's much more unaffiliated
than any
previous generation.
So, if you compare them to the
baby boomers,
for example, this generation,
even if a proportion
of them comes back, they will
still be the
most unaffiliated generation
that the country
has ever seen.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, Robert
Jones, you also
write, of course, about the
birth rate being
lower among white Protestants
and about the
phenomenon of immigration.
ROBERT JONES: Yes, that's right.
There is an internal factor.
That is this kind of
disaffiliation, but the
external factors are important
here as well,
that it is rising numbers of
Latinos immigrating
particularly from Mexico, and
lower birth
rates among whites compared to
non-whites
as well.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And so what are
the consequences
of this?
ROBERT JONES: Yes.
Well, I think it's very
important to understand
the heat that we're seeing in
our politics
today.
One of the things that I -- that
put me to
writing the book is, it always
seemed to me
that, even when there were
controversial issues,
the rhetoric, the apocalyptic
rhetoric, the
visceral nature of the rhetoric
always outstripped
the actual issues we were
talking about.
And what I think is going on is
that many
-- the anxieties that many
particularly white
conservative Christians are
feeling is being
driven by this real sense of
loss and grief
of this cultural world that they
and their
ancestors built and that used to
hold sway
in the center of American
culture, and is
now really passing from the
scene.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You're explaining
part of what's
going on in the support for
Donald Trump.
ROBERT JONES: That's right.
I should say that this book was
written and
closed before Donald Trump
really ascended
into the -- you know, to be the
nominee for
the Republican presidency.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Which is what
makes it even
more fascinating.
Why is it important that we
understand this?
ROBERT JONES: Yes.
Well, one way of putting it is
that I think
that we're at a moment where we
really are
having to come to terms with the
passing of
this era.
It is really a cultural era.
And I think, to understand Trump
supporters
and the grief, the anger that we
see from
them and why he's been able to
appeal to them,
really, his appeal to him has
not been that
he's one of them.
His appeal to them has been this
-- to appeal
to the sense of nostalgia and
loss and grief.
And when he says make America
great again,
he's saying, I'm going to
restore power to
the Christian churches, says
things like,
I'm -- we can be -- we're going
to say merry
Christmas again in this country.
We're not going to be saying
happy holidays.
Those are all about kind of big
cultural shifts
that I think are driving a lot
of anxiety
among conservative white
Christians today.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But you make the
point clearly
really throughout the book, and
especially
at the end, that this is really
-- the country
is really moving on from this to
something
else, and that there is no going
back.
ROBERT JONES: That's right.
So, I begin the book with an
obituary for
white Christian America, and I
end the book
with a eulogy.
And what I hope I'm doing at the
end is sort
of thinking about presiding over
this very
complicated loss and death in
American culture,
with some people who are
grieving, but some
people who are very much ready
to move on
and ready to say good riddance
to this era.
But I think the real challenge
for us is to
figure out how we tell a story
about who America
is and where we're going as a
country that
is sort of faithful to its past,
but makes
room, I think, for the new
demographics and
the new place that the country
is going.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And to understand
that this
is so much of -- that this is a
big part of
what's behind it.
ROBERT JONES: Absolutely.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Robert Jones, the
book is "The
End of White Christian America."
Thank you very much.
ROBERT JONES: Oh, thank you.
GWEN IFILL: And we will be back
shortly.
But, first, take a moment to
hear from your
local PBS station.
It's a chance to offer your
support, which
helps keep programs like ours on
It's a chance to offer your
support, which
helps keep programs like ours on
the air.
(BREAK)
GWEN IFILL: And before we go, an
update to
an earlier story.
GWEN IFILL: And before we go, an
update to
an earlier story.
Mexican President Enrique Pena
Nieto says
he told Republican presidential
candidate
Donald Trump his country
wouldn't pay for
a border wall.
Trump had said the issue of
payment didn't
come up during their meeting.
Trump had said the issue of
payment didn't
come up during their meeting.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And that's
the "NewsHour" for tonight.
On Thursday: more analysis of
Donald Trump's
visit to Mexico.
On Thursday: more analysis of
Donald Trump's
visit to Mexico.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us here at the "PBS
NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.
For all of us here at the "PBS
NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.